---
layout: post
title: chip8-part3
excerpt: "Writing a CHIP8 interpreter in C - stubs & layout"
categories: [coding]
tags: [howto]
---

With display and sound sorted, we can now focus on the core of the interpreter!

# Event loop

Let's think about what our interpreter needs to do.

  - initialise anything SDL2-related
  - initialise the interpreter's state
  - load the ROM into memory
  - loop forever and:
    - decode the operation
    - update the state
    - refresh the display if required
    - take user input if any

## State

State is a bit of an overloaded term - [as per the specs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CHIP-8#Virtual_machine_description) it encompasses the following:

  - memory
    - 4096 bytes
  - registers
    - 15 "general" registers and 1 special one - all 8 bits
    - the address register, 12 bits long
    - a program counter (to know where we are in the ROM), 8 bits
    - a stack pointer (to know where we are in the call stack), 8 bits
  - stack
    - 48 bytes (for 12 levels of nestings)
  - timers
    - one for sound
    - one for delay
  - input
    - 16 keys

In order to make our lives easier, and because we're not exactly constrained from a memory perspective, we can round those up in multiples of 8 bits. If we had to define a `state` struct, it could look something like this:

{% highlight c %}
typedef struct {
    uint8_t registers[16];
    uint16_t i;
    uint8_t pc;
    uint8_t sp;
    uint8_t stack[12];
    uint8_t delay_timer;
    uint8_t sound_timer;
    bool input[16];
} state;
{% endhighlight %}

We're leaving memory out it for now - the idea being that we can "apply" a state to the memory to update it. This should help in testing things. We also need to think about the pixels representing the 64x32 screen so we may need to revisit this.

# Stubs & source layout

## Layout

Our project will be structured as follows:

```
❯ tree -P "*.c|*.h|*.txt" -I "build|Testing"
.
├── CMakeLists.txt
├── conanfile.txt
├── src
│   ├── main.c
│   ├── mylib.c
│   └── mylib.h
└── test
    └── test_a.c
```

`main.c` will contain the event loop, but pretty much everything else will be sorted in a separate "library" file. This isn't strictly necessary but will help in testing things out. As this grows, we might split it even further but for now this should help us move things along nicely. Constants and the like will be defined in the header file `mylib.h`.

## Stubs

The outline looks like this:

{% highlight c %}
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    processOptions();
    initialiseSDL2();
    initialiseInterpreterState();
    loadROM();
    while (running)
    {
        processOp();
        if (needToDraw)
        {
            updateScreen();
        }
        if (hasUserInput())
        {
            processEvent();
        }
    }
  return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now let's fill this in!

### Parameters

Parameters to our interpreter will be captured with the `getopt` library - nothing fancy, single-letter options only for now (there's `getopt_long` but we'll revisit this later if required). The two options I can think of at the outset are the scaling factor (you'll need a magnifying glass to look at `64x32` on a FHD display - let alone something with a higher resolution) and a path to the ROM we want to load. One thing we'll likely need down the line is a way to control the clock speed of the interpreter but we'll kick that can down the road.

{% highlight c %}
    int scale = 1;
    char *romFilename;

    int c;
    while ((c = getopt(argc, argv, "s:r:")) != -1)
    {
        switch (c)
        {
        case 's':
            scale = atoi(optarg);
            break;
        case 'r':
            romFilename = optarg;
            break;
        case '?':
            fprintf(stderr, "Scale (-s) requires an integer > 0 and ROM (-r) a path to the ROM");
            return 1;
        default:
            abort();
        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}

Nothing fancy here - we default scaling to 1 but don't take any for the ROM path.

## Initialising SDL2

The main bit of interest here is the scaling. We'll still be drawing on a canvas of size `64x32` but we tell SDL2 to scale this up in integer increment (we don't have to, but it works nicely). So for a scale of say 4, our window will actually be `256x128` and each internal "pixel" will be a `4x4` square on screen - but that's entirely transparent to us.


{% highlight c %}
    SDL_Init(SDL_INIT_EVERYTHING);

    SDL_Window *window = SDL_CreateWindow("CHIP8 Display",
                                          SDL_WINDOWPOS_UNDEFINED, SDL_WINDOWPOS_UNDEFINED, SCREEN_WIDTH * scale, SCREEN_HEIGHT * scale, SDL_WINDOW_RESIZABLE);
    SDL_Renderer *renderer = SDL_CreateRenderer(window, -1, SDL_RENDERER_SOFTWARE);
    SDL_Texture *texture = SDL_CreateTexture(renderer, SDL_PIXELFORMAT_RGBA8888, SDL_TEXTUREACCESS_STATIC, SCREEN_WIDTH, SCREEN_HEIGHT);
    SDL_RenderSetScale(renderer, SCALE, scale);
{% endhighlight %}

The `SCREEN_WIDTH` and `SCREEN_HEIGHT` contants are defined as `64` and `32` respectively in `mylib.h`.

One thing to note is how we use `SDL_RENDERER_SOFTWARE`. This means that the `VSYNC` timer (the refersh rate of the display, usually something like 60Hz - or 60 times per second) won't be available to us. Not a deal breaker, but it does mean we'll need to handle this ourselves somehow. Again, we'll kick that can down the road.

## Interpreter State

Here we create our memory structure and our state. We also create a `64x32` array representing pixels! Now the display is technically monochrome - so we could do with an array of booleans representing whether a pixel is "on" (white) or "off" (black). But SDL2 doesn't quite work that way - the easiest representation is to have each pixel represented in an RGBA format where each value is a byte - so 32bit total. It also means we get to control the colour of what "on" and "off" mean.

{% highlight c %}
    uint8_t memory[MEM_SIZE];
    State state = {.draw = true};
    uint32_t pixels[SCREEN_WIDTH * SCREEN_HEIGHT];
    fillScreen(pixels, PIXEL_ON);
{% endhighlight %}

`MEM_SIZE` is a constant we define in `mylib.h` to be `4096`. That should be sufficient to load the ROM and any internal data structure we require.

## Loading the ROM

The first thing we need is, well, a ROM. We can get a test ROM (which is a ROM that essentially tries to cover as many op codes as possible but in a way that's easy to understand and doesn't contain convoluted logic) from [corax89](https://github.com/corax89/chip8-test-rom/raw/master/test_opcode.ch8). Let's see how it looks:

```
❯ wget --quiet https://github.com/corax89/chip8-test-rom/raw/master/test_opcode.ch8
❯ xxd -g 2 test_opcode.ch8 | head
00000000: 124e eaac aaea ceaa aaae e0a0 a0e0 c040  .N.............@
00000010: 40e0 e020 c0e0 e060 20e0 a0e0 2020 6040  @.. ...` ...  `@
00000020: 2040 e080 e0e0 e020 2020 e0e0 a0e0 e0e0   @.....   ......
00000030: 20e0 40a0 e0a0 e0c0 80e0 e080 c080 a040   .@............@
00000040: a0a0 a202 dab4 00ee a202 dab4 13dc 6801  ..............h.
00000050: 6905 6a0a 6b01 652a 662b a216 d8b4 a23e  i.j.k.e*f+.....>
00000060: d9b4 a202 362b a206 dab4 6b06 a21a d8b4  ....6+....k.....
00000070: a23e d9b4 a206 452a a202 dab4 6b0b a21e  .>....E*....k...
00000080: d8b4 a23e d9b4 a206 5560 a202 dab4 6b10  ...>....U`....k.
00000090: a226 d8b4 a23e d9b4 a206 76ff 462a a202  .&...>....v.F*..
```

We're grouping data in size of 2 bytes because that's the size of every operation for CHIP8.

The first operation might look a bit odd - `124e` is telling us `1` (jump) to address `0x24e) - but the ROM doesn't go that far:
```
❯ xxd -g 2 test_opcode.ch8 | tail -2
000001c0: a202 3001 a206 3103 a206 3207 a206 dab4  ..0...1...2.....
000001d0: 6b1a a20e d8b4 a23e d9b4 1248 13dc       k......>...H..
```

One thing to remember is that the ROM is loaded at address `0x200` and jumps are to absolute memory locations, not base + offset. We can ask `xxd` to add `0x200` to every address using the `-o` flag:

```
❯ xxd -g 2 -o 0x200 test_opcode.ch8 | head -6
00000200: 124e eaac aaea ceaa aaae e0a0 a0e0 c040  .N.............@
00000210: 40e0 e020 c0e0 e060 20e0 a0e0 2020 6040  @.. ...` ...  `@
00000220: 2040 e080 e0e0 e020 2020 e0e0 a0e0 e0e0   @.....   ......
00000230: 20e0 40a0 e0a0 e0c0 80e0 e080 c080 a040   .@............@
00000240: a0a0 a202 dab4 00ee a202 dab4 13dc 6801  ..............h.
00000250: 6905 6a0a 6b01 652a 662b a216 d8b4 a23e  i.j.k.e*f+.....>
```

Looking at `0x24e` we `6801` - the leading `6` is the "set register to value" instruction. We see a couple of registers getting set before a call to `a216`, which sets the `I` (memory) register to `216` before calling `dab4` - `d` for drawing a sprite.

So far so good! Let's load this file in memory then:

{% highlight c %}
void loadROM(char *fileName, uint8_t memory[])
{
    FILE *fp;
    fp = fopen(fileName, "rb");
    int bytesRead = fread(memory + ROM_OFFSET, sizeof(uint8_t), MAX_ROM_SIZE, fp);
    SDL_Log("Read %d bytes from %s", bytesRead, fileName);
    int numOpcodesToPrint = 8;
    SDL_Log("The first %d opcodes are:", numOpcodesToPrint);
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i < numOpcodesToPrint; i++) {
        SDL_Log("Opcode at %x: %x%x", i*2, memory[ROM_OFFSET+i*2], memory[ROM_OFFSET+i*2+1]);
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Note that for `MAX_ROM_SIZE`, this will be `0xea0-0x200` - the upper bytes being reserved for display refresh, call stacks and other bits.

We also add a bit of output to ensure we're reading this right:

```
❯ ./bin/fish8 -s 40 -r /tmp/test_opcode.ch8
INFO: Read 478 bytes from /tmp/test_opcode.ch8
INFO: The first 8 opcodes are:
INFO: Opcode at 0: 124e
INFO: Opcode at 2: eaac
INFO: Opcode at 4: aaea
INFO: Opcode at 6: ceaa
INFO: Opcode at 8: aaae
INFO: Opcode at a: e0a0
INFO: Opcode at c: a0e0
INFO: Opcode at e: c040
INFO: Escape pressed
```

Success!

## Loop

This is where we'll be processing every instruction and user input:


{% highlight c %}
    while (!state.quit)
    {
        processOp(&state, memory);
        if (state.draw)
        {
            updateScreen(renderer, texture, pixels);
            state.draw = false;
        }
        if (SDL_PollEvent(&event))
        {
            processEvent(&state, &event);
        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}

`processOp` is where the meat of the interpreter will be (and subsequent posts!). `updateScreen` will call `SDL_UpdateTexture`.

TBC
