---
layout: post
title: go-bt-1
excerpt: "Write a BitTorrent client from scratch in Go: Understanding bencode"
categories: [coding]
tags: [howto,golang]
---

First post in what will (hopefully?) be building an *extremely* simple BitTorrent client in Go. At the very least we'll aimto parse `.torrent` files, connect to peers and download files. Just to manage expectations, incoming requests (uploads), DHT and the like will likely be left as an exercise to the reader.

_Note_: most (if not all) of the snippets should be using `any` instead of `interface{}` - the 2 are now interchangeable

# `bencode`

If you have ever downloaded a `.torrent` file from say, [Ubuntu](https://ubuntu.com/download/alternative-downloads#bit-torrent) and tried to open it in a file editor, you'll be hard pressed to call this readable. The file is encoded in a format called `bencode`, the specification of which is available [here](https://wiki.theory.org/BitTorrentSpecification#Bencoding). Here's the first few lines for reference:

```
~/r/c/go-bt ❯❯❯ head src/ubuntu.torrent | fold -w 80
d8:announce35:https://torrent.ubuntu.com/announce13:announce-listll35:https://to
rrent.ubuntu.com/announceel40:https://ipv6.torrent.ubuntu.com/announceee7:commen
t29:Ubuntu CD releases.ubuntu.com10:created by13:mktorrent 1.113:creation datei1
681992889e4:infod6:lengthi2641264640e4:name34:ubuntu-23.04-live-server-amd64.iso
12:piece lengthi262144e6:pieces201520:%
```

The TL;DR is that we can use it to represent basic types - e.g. a positive integer is represented as a stream starting with `i` and ending with `e`. So 123 would be encoded as `i123e`. Lists have a similar setup - with `l` being the start delimiter. So the list `[123,456]` would be represented as `li123ei456ee`. Lists can contain other lists too!

Byte strings (I guess that'd be `char` in C?) are a little different in that they start with a number representing the length, delimited by `:` - so "foo" would be encoded as `3:foo`. Don't confuse this with UTF-8 type strings you have in Python - `len("😜".encode("utf-8"))` is actually 4 bytes!

Maps are similar to lists, starting with a `d` (easy heh?). Keys must be sorted in byte order and must be byte strings - so the Python dict `{'foo': 123}` would be encoded as `d3:fooi123ee`.

# Approach

If you have ever used a stream-based parser like `StAX` for XML, or `PyYAML`, we'll be doing something somewhat similar. Take this list with a nested element for example:

```
[1, [2], 3] = li1eli2eei3ee
```

As we process the stream, the structure looks a little bit like a tree:

```
[
    1,
    [
        2
    ],
    3
]
```

When we encounter the first `[` we set the "node type" to a list, and recursively call our parser with the remaining of the stream. After reading `1` we look to see if we had a root note - we had and it's a list, so we append the value to it. We keep recursively call ourselves with the remaining bytes of the stream. In pseudo code, this looks a bit like:

```
parse(<holder>, 'li1eli2eei3ee')
    parse([, 'i1eli2eei3ee')
    parse([1, 'li2eei3ee')
        parse([1,[,'i2eei3ee')
        parse([1,[2,'ei3ee')
            return [2]
        parse([1,[2],'i3ee')
        parse([1,[2],3, 'e')
        parse([1,[2],3], '')
return [1,[2],3]
```

# Interface, "data" holders

Here's the general interface - we only need 2 methods. One to add value as we see them, and one to return the contents.

{% highlight golang %}
type Holder interface {
	Add(value any)
	Obj() any
}
{% endhighlight %}

Here are the basic type (`List`, `Dict` and `Value` - the latter is for scalars of all kinds):

{% highlight golang %}
type ListHolder struct {
	List []any
}

type DictHolder struct {
	Dict map[string]any
	// tracks the current key
	Key string
}

type ValueHolder struct {
	Val any
}
{% endhighlight %}

Their implementation of the `Holder` interface is as follows:

{% highlight golang %}
// Add methods

func (c *ListHolder) Add(value any) {
	c.List = append(c.List, value)
}

func (c *DictHolder) Add(value any) {
	if c.Key == "" {
		c.Key = value.(string)
	} else {
		c.Dict[c.Key] = value
		// reset
		c.Key = ""
	}
}

func (c *ValueHolder) Add(value any) {
	c.Val = value
}

// Obj methods

func (c *ListHolder) Obj() any {
	return c.List
}

func (c *DictHolder) Obj() any {
	return c.Dict
}

func (c *ValueHolder) Obj() any {
	return c.Val
}
{% endhighlight %}

The only one worth a mention is the `DictHolder`. When we finish processing an element inside the `dict`, we need to know hwhether it was a key or a value - so we use `c.Key` internally as a toggle. If it's set, the next call to `Add` is for a value - and if not, it's the start of a key.

# Parsing

Now we almost ready to start parsing the stream! Let's start with some basic tests (TDD FTW!) to ensure we're doing the right thing. It's not full coverage but should be enough to help us flush out silly mistakes.

{% highlight golang %}
func TestBencodeRecursiveParser(t *testing.T) {
        // negative int!
		r := bytes.NewReader([]byte("i-42e"))
		ret := data.ParseBencoded2(r)
		if ret != -42 {
			t.Errorf("expected -42, got %v", ret)
		}

		// string, below 10 chars
		r = bytes.NewReader([]byte("3:foo"))
		ret = data.ParseBencoded2(r).(string)
		if ret != "foo" {
			t.Errorf("expected 'foo', got %v", ret)
		}

		// string, above 10 chars
		r = bytes.NewReader([]byte("12:foobarraboof"))
		ret = data.ParseBencoded2(r).(string)
		if ret != "foobarraboof" {
			t.Errorf("expected 'foo', got %v", ret)
		}

		// list with one int
		r = bytes.NewReader([]byte("li42ee"))
		retSlice, _ := data.ParseBencoded2(r).([]interface{})
		if len(retSlice) != 1 && retSlice[0] != 42 {
			t.Errorf("expected [42], got %v", ret)
		}

		// list with two items
		r = bytes.NewReader([]byte("li42ei43ee"))
		retSlice, _ = data.ParseBencoded2(r).([]interface{})
		if len(retSlice) != 2 && retSlice[0] != 42 && retSlice[1] != 43 {
			t.Errorf("expected [42, 43], got %v", ret)
		}

		// a simple map
		r = bytes.NewReader([]byte("d3:fooi42ee"))
		retMap, _ := data.ParseBencoded2(r).(map[string]interface{})
		if retMap["foo"] != 42 {
			t.Errorf("expected [42], got %v", retMap)
		}

		// a map with a list
		r = bytes.NewReader([]byte("d3:fooli42eee"))
		retMap, _ = data.ParseBencoded2(r).(map[string]interface{})
		retSlice = retMap["foo"].([]interface{})
		if len(retSlice) != 1 && retSlice[0] != 42 {
			t.Errorf("expected {'foo': [42]}, got %v", ret)
		}
}
{% endhighlight %}

The parsing is split into 2 - we have the public interface `ParseBencoded2` (2 because my first impl wasn't something to be proud of), and the internal *recursive* parsing function called `parseBencodeStream`. The `check` function is a little helper to help catch issues early. I like a good debugging session as much as the next person but that's simpler than letting errors propagate.

{% highlight golang %}
func check(err error) {
	if err != nil {
		if err != io.EOF {
			panic(err)
		}
	}
}

func parseBencodeStream(container Holder, reader *bufio.Reader) Holder {
	b, err := reader.ReadByte()
	if err != nil {
		return container
	}
	switch b {
	case 'e':
		return container
	case 'i':
		buff, err := reader.ReadBytes('e')
		check(err)
		val, err := strconv.Atoi(string(buff[:len(buff)-1]))
		check(err)
		container.Add(val)
		return parseBencodeStream(container, reader)
	case 'l':
		c := parseBencodeStream(&ListHolder{List: make([]any, 0)}, reader)
		container.Add(c.(*ListHolder).List)
		return parseBencodeStream(container, reader)
	case 'd':
		c := parseBencodeStream(&DictHolder{Dict: make(map[string]any)}, reader)
		container.Add(c.(*DictHolder).Dict)
		return parseBencodeStream(container, reader)
	case '0', '1', '2', '3', '4', '5', '6', '7', '8', '9':
		buff, err := reader.ReadBytes(':')
		check(err)
		strLen := string(b)
		if len(buff) > 1 {
			strLen += string(buff[:len(buff)-1])
		}
		strLenInt, err := strconv.Atoi(strLen)
		check(err)
		val := make([]byte, strLenInt)
		for i := 0; i < strLenInt; i++ {
			b, err = reader.ReadByte()
			check(err)
            val[i] = b
		}
		container.Add(string(val[:])
		return parseBencodeStream(container, reader)
	}
	return container
}

func ParseBencoded2(r io.Reader) any {
	reader := bufio.NewReader(r)

	// kick this off by passing an empty holder
	container := parseBencodeStream(&ValueHolder{}, reader)
	return container.Obj()
}
{% endhighlight %}

We kick things off with a `ValueHolder` (because we expect to return a single value - `i1ei2e` wouldn't be "valid" per se, it'd need to be in a container) and a pointer to `bufio.Reader`, which allows us to continuously read form the same stream. We read a byte at a time in some cases, and in others until we hit a specific delimiter (e.g. `e` for integers, `:` for strings etc...). If we find a new container delimiter we create the appropriate holder (for a list or a map) and recurse accordingly.

Running our tests shows we're home free:
```
/V/r/c/g/src ❯❯❯ go test ./data
ok      go-bt/data      0.351s
```

# Encoding

We're half-way there. We can parse data, let's make sure we can serialise it back. The beauty of this is that from a test perspective, `encode(parse(data))` is equivalent to the identity function! That is, this is just equal to `data`. A bit like decompressing a compressed file.

_Caveat emptor_: the encoding code will be sufficient for BitTorrent but isn't comprehensive enough to support all kinds of types!

If you've ever used reflection in say, Java, you'll appreciate how terse it is in golang! As with the parser, we'll need to recurse on each value in a container. For maps that means we'll need to first encode the key, then the value. For lists, we'll need to encode each elemenet.

As done previously, let's start with some tests - we only need to specify the input and ensure that's what we get back:

{% highlight golang %}
func TestBencodeDecode(t *testing.T) {

	testCases := []struct {
		data []byte
	}{
		{[]byte("i-42e")},
		{[]byte("3:foo")},
		{[]byte("12:foobarraboof")},
		{[]byte("li42ee")},
		{[]byte("li42ei43ee")},
		{[]byte("d3:fooi42ee")},
		{[]byte("d3:fooli42eee")},
        {[]byte("d3:fooi42e3:zari1ee")},
	}

	buf := &bytes.Buffer{}
	for _, testCase := range testCases {
		buf.Reset()
		data.Encode(buf, data.ParseBencoded2(bytes.NewReader(testCase.data)))
		if bytes.Compare(buf.Bytes(), testCase.data) != 0 {
			t.Errorf("expected %s, got %s", testCase.data, buf.Bytes())
		}
	}
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now for abusing `reflect` with all kinds of types:

{% highlight golang %}
func Encode(buffer *bytes.Buffer, o any) {
	value := reflect.ValueOf(o)
	switch value.Kind() {
	case reflect.Int, reflect.Int16, reflect.Int32, reflect.Int64:
		buffer.WriteByte('i')
		buffer.WriteString(strconv.Itoa(int(value.Int())))
		buffer.WriteByte('e')
	case reflect.Uint, reflect.Uint16, reflect.Uint32, reflect.Uint64:
		buffer.WriteByte('i')
		buffer.WriteString(strconv.Itoa(int(value.Uint())))
		buffer.WriteByte('e')
	case reflect.String:
		buffer.WriteString(strconv.Itoa(len(value.Interface().(string))))
		buffer.WriteString(":")
		buffer.WriteString(value.Interface().(string))
	case reflect.Slice:
		buffer.WriteByte('l')
		// so this is a bit funky - we can't convert e.g. []int to []any directly
		temp := make([]any, value.Len())

		for i := 0; i < value.Len(); i++ {
			temp[i] = value.Index(i).Interface()
		}
		for _, val := range temp {
			Encode(buffer, val)
		}
		buffer.WriteByte('e')
	case reflect.Map:
		buffer.WriteByte('d')
		temp := make(map[string]any, value.Len())

		// we need a map[string]any
		iter := value.MapRange()
		for iter.Next() {
			k := iter.Key()
			v := iter.Value()
			temp[k.Interface().(string)] = v.Interface()
		}

		// keys need to be sorted alphabetically
		keys := make([]string, 0, len(temp))
		for k := range temp {
			keys = append(keys, k)
		}
		slices.Sort(keys)

		for _, key := range keys {
			// first we write the key
			Encode(buffer, key)
			// then the value
			Encode(buffer, temp[key])
		}
		buffer.WriteByte('e')
	default:
		panic(fmt.Sprintf("can't handle type %s", value.Kind()))
	}
}
{% endhighlight %}

Note the `default` in the `switch` - there may be types we're not aware of, and those will cause us to `panic`. Particularly if we passed in a `struct` of some kind we'd be toast.

# Struct tags and parsing a `.torrent` file!

_Be warned, this abuses `reflect` even moar_

Now that we can marshall data in and out what we ideally want is to represent a `.torrent` file as a series of `struct` (it contains nested fields so it won't be just one) and have it be populated automagically on the back of a `bencode`d stream. This is where tags come in handy - similarly to what one might do when marshalling to/from JSON.

Note that we only need to define tags for the fields we want populated automatically - fields that don't contain tags will be left alone. Furthermore, we can nest data types - for example a `.torrent` file is, at the outset, nothing more than a map with some predefined keys - and some of those keys (like `info`) are maps themselves.

A subset of the fields could be represented as such:

{% highlight golang %}
type BETorrent struct {
	InfoHash     [20]byte
	Announce     string   `bencode:"announce"`
	AnnounceList [][]string `bencode:"announce-list"`
	Info         BEInfo   `bencode:"info"`
}

type BEInfo struct {
	Name        string `bencode:"name"`
	PieceLength uint64 `bencode:"piece length"` // bytes per piece
	Pieces      string `bencode:"pieces"` // byte string, 20-byte SHA1 for each piece
	Length      uint64 `bencode:"length"` // of file(s), in bytes
}
{% endhighlight %}

Filling in a `BETorrent` `struct` consists of iterating through each field and finding the appropriate match in the encoded data. Side note, `announce-list` *is* a list of list of strings... :shrug:

{% highlight golang %}
func ParseTorrentFile2(r io.Reader) *BETorrent {
	obj := ParseBencoded2(r)
	d, ok := obj.(map[string]any)
	if !ok {
		panic("Unable to parse torrent")
	}
	betorrent := &BETorrent{}
	fillStruct(betorrent, d)
	return betorrent
}
{% endhighlight %}

`fillStruct` is the workhorse that parses data both iteratively *and* recursively:

{% highlight golang %}
func fillStruct(o any, d map[string]any) {
	var structure reflect.Type
	if reflect.TypeOf(o).Kind() != reflect.Struct {
		structure = reflect.TypeOf(o).Elem()
	} else {
		structure = reflect.TypeOf(o)
	}

	var fill func(containerType reflect.Type, val any, field reflect.Value)

	// using this for recursive calls for e.g. slices of slices
	fill = func(containerType reflect.Type, val any, field reflect.Value) {
		switch containerType.Kind() {
		case reflect.Struct:
			oo := reflect.New(containerType)
			fillStruct(oo.Interface(), val.(map[string]any))
			field.Set(oo.Elem())
		case reflect.Slice:
			s := reflect.ValueOf(val)
			// reflect.SliceOf(string) say, returns a []string type
			valueSlice := reflect.MakeSlice(reflect.SliceOf(containerType.Elem()), s.Len(), s.Len())
			for i := 0; i < s.Len(); i++ {
				fill(containerType.Elem(), s.Index(i).Interface(), valueSlice.Index(i))
			}
			field.Set(valueSlice.Convert(containerType))
		default:
			bindat := reflect.ValueOf(val).Convert(containerType)
			field.Set(bindat)
		}
	}

	for i := 0; i < structure.NumField(); i++ {
		f := structure.Field(i)
		tag := f.Tag.Get("bencode")
		if val, ok := d[tag]; ok {
			fill(f.Type, val, reflect.ValueOf(o).Elem().Field(i))
		}
	}
}
{% endhighlight %}

note it isn't fully generic. For one it expects a `map[string]any` for the data that needs to be deserialised. Also the handling of `reflect.Slice` feels a bit wonky even though it works.

## But can we go back?

We can parse a `.torrent` into a struct, and we can encode an arbitrary dictionary. But can we go from a struct back into a bencoded map? It turns out we'll need this later, so let's get it out of the way now. In a nutshell, those are the tests we want to satisfy. Note that the return value should be a `map[string]any` - we already know how to encode this kind of datastructure:

{% highlight golang %}
func TestBencodeStruct(t *testing.T) {
	// info dict with multiple files
	beinfo := data.BEInfo{
		Name:        "foo",
		PieceLength: 65536,
		Files: []data.BEFile{
			{
				Path:   []string{"path1"},
				Length: 123,
			},
			{
				Path:   []string{"path2"},
				Length: 456,
			},
		},
	}
	val := bencode.ToDict(beinfo)
	// due to how we encode, note how we need to specify unit64
	expected := map[string]any{
		"name":         "foo",
		"piece length": uint64(65536),
		// "length":       uint64(0),
		// "pieces":       "",
		"files": []map[string]any{
			{"path": []string{"path1"}, "length": 123},
			{"path": []string{"path2"}, "length": 456},
		},
	}
	if !reflect.DeepEqual(val, expected) {
		t.Errorf("exepcted %+v, got %+v", expected, val)
	}

	// info dict with a single file
	beinfo = data.BEInfo{
		Name:        "foo",
		PieceLength: 65536,
		Pieces:      "deadbeef",
		Length:      123456,
	}
	val = bencode.ToDict(beinfo)
	// due to how we encode, note how we need to specify unit64
	expected = map[string]any{
		"name":         "foo",
		"piece length": uint64(65536),
		"length":       uint64(123456),
		"pieces":       "deadbeef",
		// "files":        make([]map[string]any, 0),
	}
	if !reflect.DeepEqual(val, expected) {
		t.Errorf("exepcted %+v, got %+v", expected, val)
	}
}
{% endhighlight %}

Leveraging the pattern that allowed us to go from dictionary to struct, we can reverse the order to through the struct and look for fields with a `bencode` tag (ignoring those that don't have one or just as importantly, those that aren't set):

{% highlight golang %}
func ToDict(val any) map[string]any {
	structure := reflect.TypeOf(val)
	ret := map[string]any{}

	var fill func(val any) any

	fill = func(obj any) any {
		t := reflect.TypeOf(obj)
		switch t.Kind() {
		case reflect.Struct:
			return ToDict(obj)
		case reflect.Slice:
			v := reflect.ValueOf(obj)
			switch t.Elem().Kind() {
			case reflect.Struct:
				valueSlice := make([]map[string]any, v.Len())
				for i := 0; i < v.Len(); i++ {
					o := ToDict(v.Index(i).Interface())
					valueSlice[i] = o
				}
				return valueSlice

			default:
				valueSlice := reflect.MakeSlice(reflect.SliceOf(t.Elem()), v.Len(), v.Len())
				for i := 0; i < v.Len(); i++ {
					o := fill(v.Index(i).Interface())
					valueSlice.Index(i).Set(reflect.ValueOf(o))
				}
				return valueSlice.Convert(t).Interface()
			}
		default:
			return obj
		}
	}

	for i := 0; i < structure.NumField(); i++ {
		f := structure.Field(i)
		tag := f.Tag.Get("bencode")
		// idk if this is the correct thing to do, but it does help flush out unset values
		if tag != "" && !reflect.ValueOf(val).FieldByName(f.Name).IsZero() {
			ret[tag] = fill(reflect.ValueOf(val).FieldByName(f.Name).Interface())
		}

	}
	return ret
}
{% endhighlight %}

# Taking it further

`.torrent` files aren't the only files leveraging `bencode` in BitTorrent. The tracker response for instance is another. I had to make a few changes to leverage generics - e.g.

{% highlight golang %}
func ParseFromReader[S BETorrent | BETrackerResponse](r io.Reader) *S {
	obj := ParseBencoded2(r)
	d, ok := obj.(map[string]any)
	if !ok {
		panic("Unable to parse torrent")
	}
	var s S
	fillStruct(&s, d)
	return &s
}
{% endhighlight %}

where a subset of the relevant structs are defined as:

{% highlight golang %}
type BEPeer struct {
	Id   string `bencode:"peer id"`
	IP   string `bencode:"ip"`
	Port int64  `bencode:"port"`
}

type BETrackerResponse struct {
	Complete   int64    `bencode:"complete"`   // seeds
	Incomplete int64    `bencode:"incomplete"` // leechers
	Interval   int64    `bencode:"interval"`   // in seconds
	Peers      []BEPeer `bencode:"peers"`
}
{% endhighlight %}

All in all this was rather fun - except the `reflect` part, which whilst satisfying to get right, was more of a pain than I care to admit. But it does make the `struct`s that much easier to use!

Join me for [part 2]({% post_url 2024-09-01-go-bt-2 %})!
